+++
title = "Usage of GDB debugger"
description = "How to use the GDB debugger with a Raspberry Pi Pico 2 W."
draft = false
weight = 10
[taxonomies]
tags = [ "SWD", "Pico", "Rust", "cargo-embed" ]
+++




## Debugging with GDB

Once you start creating slightly more complicated embedded programs, you might want to:

* introspect the values of local variables
* follow the execution flow

For this, you need a piece of software called a debugger. The most commonly used debugger for Rust and C is [GDB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Debugger).

*Remark: In VS Code, you can install the `probe-rs-debug` extension to use the `probe-rs` toolkit for debugging. It uses a different protocol than `gdb`. See [instructions](https://probe.rs/docs/tools/debugger/).*

### Setup of `cargo-embed`

Adjust the `Embed.toml` file in the root of this repository if necessary. This file configures the behavior of the `cargo embed` command when run on your laptop.

For example, if the configuration contains the following, a GDB debug server session will be started, and the loaded program will be reset to the first instruction.

```toml
[default.gdb]
enabled = true

[default.reset]
halt_afterwards = true
```

Prevent lines from being merged or reordered during the build step of your program. These kinds of changes can make it harder for the debugger to stop at the right breakpoints. Add the following to `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[profile.dev]
debug = 2
opt-level = 0
```

To be sure the new configuration is used, you can clear the `target` build cache with `cargo clean` and then build again:

```bash
cargo clean
cargo build --example [BINARY_EXAMPLE_NAME]
```

### Starting a GDB Client

While searching for an appropriate GDB package, look for one that supports the architecture of your target chip. In the case of a Pico 2, `gdb` needs `ARM` support built in.

Install the multi-architecture version of `gdb`:

```bash
sudo apt-get install gdb-multiarch
```

Then run the following command to create and connect a `gdb` debugging client:

```bash
gdb-multiarch target/thumbv8m.main-none-eabi/debug/[BINARY_EXAMPLE_NAME]
```

*Note: The command may also be `gdb`.*

Within the `gdb` client on your laptop, you have to connect to the running `GDB` server on the debug Pico probe:

```txt
target remote :1337
monitor reset halt # optionally resets to the first instruction
tui enable
```

Alternatively, you can tell `gdb` to execute these commands automatically by writing them in a `.gdbinit` file in the root of this repository.

### Common GDB Commands

Breakpoints can be set in the `gdb` client by using the `break` command followed by a line number or function name:

```txt
break [FUNCTION_NAME]  # Set a breakpoint at a specific function
break [LINE_NUMBER]  # Set a breakpoint at a specific line number
break [FILE_NAME]:[LINE_NUMBER]  # Set a breakpoint at a specific line in a file
```

You can also write hardware breakpoints directly in your code with `cortex_m::asm::bkpt()`.

To progress through the execution of your debugged program, you can use:

```txt
continue  # Continue execution until the next breakpoint is hit
next      # Step to the next line of code
```

For introspection of variables:

```txt
print [VAR_NAME]
```
