+++
title = "GUI"
description = "Graphical user applications I use often."
weight = 3
[taxonomies]
tags = ["Linux", "shell", "tool", "command-line"]
+++


## Development

### Meld

You can configure external tools in `git`, called 'difftools' that improve the default diff-viewing experience. My favourite difftool is [`meld`](https://meldmerge.org/). You can configure it in `git` as the default difftool. In
 `~/.gitconfig`

```conf
[diff]
tool = meld

[difftool.meld]
cmd = meld "$LOCAL" "$REMOTE"
```

To launch a window comparing the whole repository at different points in time, use something like (`-d` stands for directory compare):

- `git difftool -d [COMMIT_LEFT]..[COMMIT_RIGHT]`
- `git difftool -d [OTHER_COMMIT]`

I recommend going into the settings of `meld` to turn on syntax highlighting.

You can also add it as a `git` alias

```conf
[alias]
meld=!git difftool -t meld --dir-diff
```

Now, you can use the shortcut `git meld [BRANCH]` to compare the current branch with another branch graphicall (and don't need to remember the `-d` flag).

### Geekbench benchmarking

Link: [Geekbench](https://www.geekbench.com/)

When you want to make a choice between different computer systems, you may want to benchmark them against eachother. I found the (closed-source) Geekbench test suites quite easy to use. They exist for all operating systems and are packaged for most Linux distributions.

After installation, you can just run one of the `geekbench` commands (based on your CPU architecture). The results are uploaded to Geekbench servers and displayed in a web interface.

You can directly save results to your account, which is useful if you want to monitor for performance regressions on your machines.

## Day-to-day

### OBS Studio

A screen recording tool that is great for preparing conference talks.

### LunaTask

An end-to-end encrypted task manager that has good support for all platforms (but is not free).

### Mixxx

Excellent, open source, feature-rich music mixing software.
